>> Woodruff: A RECORD-BREAKING
DEEP FREEZE SENT SHIVERS ACROSS
A WIDE SWATH OF THE COUNTRY
TODAY.
WE TALK WITH THE MAYORS OF ST.
LOUIS AND MINNEAPOLIS WHERE WIND
CHILLS PLUNGED WELL BELOW ZERO.
GOOD EVENING, I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
>> Ifill: AND I'M GWEN IFILL.
ALSO AHEAD THIS MONDAY, THU.S.E
IS ACCELERATING ITS SHIPMENT OF
MISSILES AND DRONES TO IRAQ TO
AID THAT GOVERNMENT'S FIGHT
AGAINST AL-QAEDA-LINKED
MILITANTS FOR CONTROL OF TWO KEY
CITIES.
>> Woodruff: CONGRESS GOES BACK
TO WORK, DIVING HEAD-FIRST INTO
A FIGHT OVER UNEMPLOYMENT
BENEFITS.
WE HEAR FROM THE SECRETARY OF
LABOR THOMAS PEREZ AND
REPUBLICAN ECONOMIST DOUGLAS
HOLTZ-EAKIN.
>> Ifill: PLUS, A PROMISING BUT
STILL UNPROVEN APPROACH TO
COMBATING ALZHEIMER'S TARGETING
THOSE AT HIGH RISK BEFORE THEY
SHOW SYMPTOMS.
>> WN MYHE FATHER WAS STILL
ALIVE AND I LOOKED AT HIM, ALL I
SAW WAS MY DESTINY.
AND I WAS FRIGHTENED FOR ME, BUT
I WAS MORE FRIGHTENED FOR MY
FAMILY.
>> Woodruff: THOSE ARE JUST SOME
OF THE STORIES WE'RE COVERING ON
TONIGHT'S PBS NEWSHOUR.
>> Ifill: BITTER ARCTIC COLD
GRIPPED THE MIDWEST, PUSHED
EASTWARD AND DOVE INTO THE DEEP
SOUTH TODAY.
MILLIONS OF PEOPLE ACROSS DOZENS
OF STATES FACED UNHEARD-OF
TEMPERATURES.
THE FRIGID COLD RUSHED IN ON THE
HEELS OF NEAR-BLIZZARD
CONDITIONS EMPTYING ROADS OF
TRAFFIC IN PARTS OF ILLINOIS.
WHILE IN MICHIGAN, ACCIDENTS
LITTERED HIGHWAYS IN ICY, SNOWY
CONDITIONS.
AND ST. LOUIS CLEANED UP FROM
SUNDAY'S ONE-DAY RECORD
SNOWFALL: 10.6 INCHES.
BUT THE REAL DANGER WAS THE
COLD.
INDIANA GOVERNOR MIKE PENCE
URGED PEOPLE TO USE COMMON
SENSE.
>> IF YOU CAN STAY IN TODAY,
STAY IN ALL DAY TODAY.
WE ASK YOU TO HEED SIGNS ABOUT
ROAD CLOSURES, WE ASK YOU TO
HEED THE LEADERSHIP AND
ANNOUNCEMENTS OF LOCAL
COMMUNITIES.
THEY ARE FOR YOUR SAFETY AND
IT'S IMPORTANT THAT WE TAKE THIS
WEATHER EVENT VERY, VERY
SERIOUSLY.
>> Ifill: THE ARCTIC AIR, KNOWN
AS A "POLAR VORTEX", STRETCHED
ALL THE WAY FROM THE DAKOTAS TO
THE DEEP SOUTH.
WIND CHILL WARNINGS AND
ADVISORIES WERE IN EFFECT ALL
THE WAY TO THE GULF COAST
THROUGH TUESDAY.
AND TEMPERATURES JUST KEPT
DROPPING, TO -16 IN BLOOMINGTON,
A WIND CHILL, MAKES THAT -40.
OFFICIALS WARNED THAT FROSTBITE
CAN HAPPEN IN JUST FIVE MINUTES
IN TEMPERATURES THAT LOW.
PEOPLE WHO DID GO OUTSIDE
BUNDLED UP TO WARD OFF THE SUB-
ZERO TEMPERATURES.
>> I GOT A HEAVY SKI JACKET AND
MY SCARF, BUT I'VE GOT 12 BLOCKS
TO WALK IN DOWNTOWN CHICAGO.
>> Ifill: SOME PLUNGED INTO THE
DEEP FREEZE ANYWAY.
THIS GREEN BAY PACKERS FAN WENT
TO EXTREMES TO SEE SUNDAY'S
N.F.L. PLAYOFF GAME WITH THE SAN
FRANCISCO 49'ERS.
>> I HAVE FOUR LAYERS OF LONG-
JOHNS, TWO SETS OF SNOW PANTS,
FOUR SHIRTS, A SWEATSHIRT AND A
COAT.
>> Ifill: THE PACKERS LOST.
TODAY, THE COLD AND SNOW
SHUTTERED SCHOOL SYSTEMS IN THE
ENTIRE STATE OF MINNESOTA AND IN
ST. LOUIS, CHICAGO, MILWAUKEE,
INDIANAPOLIS AND DETROIT.
FOR AIR TRAVELERS, IT WAS HARD
TO GET ANYWHERE, WITH MORE THAN
8,000 FLIGHTS CANCELED SINCE
FRIDAY, MORE THAN 3,000 TODAY.
>> WE FINALLY GOT ON THE PLANE
ABOUT AN HOUR LATE, HEADED OUT,
DE-ICED, STARTED TO DE-ICE,
STOPPED DE-ICING, WAITED, DE-
ICED AGAIN, HEADED FOR THE
RUNWAY, WAITED, AND THEN TURNED
AROUND AND WENT BACK TO THE GATE
AGAIN AND WAITED, AND THEN
FINALLY GOT OFF THE PLANE.
SO THERE WAS A LOT OF WAITING,
BUT HERE WE ARE, BUT WHAT CAN
YOU DO?
>> Ifill: THE LOW, LOW
TEMPERATURES ARE EXPECTED TO
LAST THROUGH TOMORROW, THEN
GRADUALLY INCH THEIR WAY INTO
DOUBLE DIGITS BY THE END OF THE
WEEK.
DOUBLE DIGIT TEMPERATURES
PROBABLY SOUND GOOD RIGHT NOW TO
BOTH OF OUR GUESTS, A PAIR OF
MAYORS WHO ARE DEALING WITH THE
VERY REAL IMPACT OF THIS IN
THEIR CITIES: BETSY HODGES FROM
MINNEAPOLIS AND FRANCIS SLAY OF
ST. LOUIS.
YOU MAYOR HODGES, YOU'RE
KNOWN AS BEING PRETTY TOUGH
PEOPLE IN MINNESOTA, IS THIS
AS BAD AS YOU'VE EVER SEEN
IT?
YOU KNOW T HASN'T BEEN THIS
COLD IN MANY YEARS IN
MINNEAPOLIS.
BUT WE-- WE KNOW HOW TO
HANDLE IT HERE IN
MINNEAPOLIS.
WE'VE BEEN PREPARING FOR
QUITE SOME TIME, ESPECIALLY
GIVEN WE KNOW THE IMPACT
CLIMATE CHANGE WILL HAVE ON
OUR CITY OVER TIME.
>> MAYOR, LET ME ASK YOU THE
SAME QUESTION.
THEY'RE PRETTY TOUGH IN
MINNEAPOLIS BUT St. LOUIS
YOU DON'T THINK OF A PLACE
THAT IS WEATHER STRICTERN
LIKE THIS.
>> YEAH, THIS IS A VERY
UNUSUAL WEATHER EVENT.
IT'S NOT SO OF THE AMOUNT OF
SNOW WE RECEIVED, IT'S THE
BITTER COLD.
WE HAVEN'T HAD SUBZERO HIGHS
TEMPERATURES FOR MANY, MANY
YEARS IN ST. LOUIS, SO IT'S
BEEN VERY, VERY DANGEROUS.
BUT WE'VE-- OUR BIGGEST
CONCERNS HAVE BEEN OUR
OLDEST, OUR YOUNGEST, OUR
MOST LOW INCOME RESIDENTS AS
WELL AS OUR HOMELESS
RESIDENTS IN ST. LOUIS.
>> MAYOR HODGES, YOU'RE THE
PRO, TELL US HOW DO YOU
PREPARE FOR SOMETHING LIKE
THIS?
>> WELL, I MEAN CERTAINLY
YOU KNOW WE ENCOURAGE FOLKS
IF THEY NEED TO TO STAY IN.
THE GOVERNOR CANCELLED
SCHOOLS STATEWIDE.
OUR SCHOOL SYSTEM IS ALSO
GOING TO BE SHUT TOMORROW.
IN OUR CITY WE HAVE DELAYED
GARBAGE COLLECTION FOR A
DAY.
THE FOLKS WHO WORK OUTSIDE,
WE NEED TO MAKE SURE THEY
HAVE THE PROTECTIONS THAT
THEY NEED, ESPECIALLY OUR
FIRST RESPONDERS.
YOU KNOW, WE MAKE SURE THEY
HAVE THE PROTECTION THEY
NEED BUT THEY ARE HEROES.
AND THEY ARE DOING THEIR
JOBS IN THIS COLD.
>> Ifill: HOW DO RESIDENTS
RESPOND TO THIS?
DO THEY JUST SAY OH, IT'S
COLD, WE KNOW WHAT COLD IS
IN JANUARY IN MINNESOTA AND
GO ABOUT THEIR BUSINESS OR
DO THEY TAKE THIS MORE
SERIOUSLY THIS TIME?
>> I THINK IT'S BOTH.
YOU KNOW, PEOPLE TAKE IT
SERIOUSLY BUT WE KNOW HOW TO
HANDLE IT.
AND SO WE, YOU KNOW, OUR
PROTOCOLS COME INTO PLAY.
THERE'S A LOT OF PHRASES
LIKE OH, IT'S VERY BRISK
OUTSIDE, IT'S VERY BRISK.
>> Ifill: BRISK SOUNDS LIKE
IT IS AN UNDERSTATEMENT,
MAYOR SLAY, YOU ALSO HAVE TO
WORRY AS YOU POINTED OUT BY
THE MOST VULNERABLE AMONG
YOU.
DO YOU HAVE A HOMELESS
CONSIDERATIONS THAT YOU HAVE
TO TAKE INTO EFFECT, PEOPLE
WITHOUT DON'T HAVE SHELTER?
>> WE DO.
AND WE'VE OPENED UP
EMERGENCY OVERFLOW SHELTERS
AND WE HAVE A LOT OF
ORGANIZATIONS HERE IN ST.
LOUIS WHO HAVE BEEN WORKING
TOGETHER, St. LOUIS CITY AND
COUNTY T HAS BEEN VERY
SUCCESSFUL.
WE HAVE NOT TURNED ANYONE
PEOPLE THAT ARE ATTENDING
THESE HAVE BEEN VERY
COMFORTABLE AND SEEM TO BE
VERY SATISFIED.
I VISITED ONE OF THOSE
SHELTERS TODAY.
THE OTHER THING WE'RE DOING
IS FOR OUR HOMELESS SENIORS,
OUR HOME BOUND SENIORS, WHO
MAY NOT HVE SAOMEONE
CHECKING ON THEM.
WE HAVE A FUNCTIONAL NEED TO
REGISTRY WHERE WE CALL
THOUSANDS OF THESE HOME
BOUND SENIORS TO SEE HOW
THEY'RE DOING.
IF WE DON'T HEAR BACK FROM
THEM, WE CHECK ON THEM.
SO WE'RE OUT CHECKING ON
THEM AS WELL.
AND CERTAINLY WE'RE
CONCERNED ABOUT OUR LOWEST
INCOME RESIDENTS WHO HAVE
PROBLEMS WITH THEIR UTILITY
BILLS.
WE DO HAVE A ORGANIZATION
HEAT UP St. LOUIS WHERE IF
SOMEONE CAN'T PAY THEIR
UTILITY BILLS, IT'S A
PRIVATE ORGANIZATION THAT
WILL HELP PAY THOSE BILLS
FOR THEM SO THEY CAN KEEP
THEIR HEAT ON AND KEEP THEIR
FAMILY SAFE.
>> SAME QUESTION TO YOU, HOW
DO YOU TAKE-- DOW TAKE
SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS TO DEAL
WITH THE MOST VULNERABLE
AMONG YOU?
>> ABSOLUTELY WE DO.
I MEAN THE BIGGEST THING WE
NEED TO DO IS GET THE WORD
OUT TO PEOPLE THAT THIS IS
HAPPENING.
AND WHAT SERVICES ARE
AVAILABLE AND ARE PROVIDED
TO THEM.
WE HAVE A VERY ROBUST
PROGRAM FOR WORKING WITH
HOMELESS FOLKS.
AND WE NEED, YOU KNOW, WE
MAKE SURE THAT THEY GET WHAT
THEY NEED AS WELL.
AND KIDS, YOU KNOW, I MEAN
THE SCHOOLS WERE CANCELLED
BECAUSE WE DON'T WANT KIDS
WAITING OUT IN THE COLD.
WE DON'T WANT, YOU KNOW, THE
DANGER TO HIT THEM IF WE
CAN.
BUT LIKE I SAID WE'RE PRETTY
HEARTY PEOPLE THIS IS NOT
UNUSUAL FOR US.
WE HAVE BEEN PREPARING FOR
WEATHER EVENTS LIKE THIS FOR
MANY, MANY YEARS AND PEOPLE
ARE PRETTY FAMILIAR WITH
WHAT NEEDS TO BE DONE.
>> Ifill: DOW HAVE-- ARE YOU
HOPING FOR OR COUNTING ON
THE PROSPECT OF WARMTH ANY
TIME SOON, MAYOR HODGES?
>> WELL, IT SEEMS LIKE WE'RE
GOING TO BE WARMING UP INTO
THE 20s OR 30s THIS WEEKEND.
WHICH ASK ABOUT 50 OR 60
DEGREES WARMER THAN IT IS
NOW, SO THAT SOUNDS PRETTY
GOOD TO FOLKS AROUND HERE.
>> Ifill: HOW ABOUT YOU
MAYOR SLAY?
>> WARM WEATHER IS ON ITS
WAY.
WE'LL BE IN THE 20s
TOMORROW.
IT LOOKS LIKE BY WEDNESDAY
IT BE UP IN THE 30s AND BY
THE WEEKEND IT COULD BE UP
TO 50 DEGREES, SO WE'RE
LOOKING AT SOME PRETTY QUICK
THAWING, BUT IN THE MEANTIME
IT'S STILL GOING TO BE VERY
DANGEROUS AND STREET CREWS
AND OTHERS ARE OUT CLEANING
THE STREETS STILL.
IT WILL STILL BE DANGEROUS
FOR PEOPLE TO DRIVE.
THEY HAVE TO BE CAREFUL,
SAFE, SMART.
AND BE VERY PATIENT.
>> MAYOR SLAY, WE WISH YOU
THAWING IN St. LOUIS AND
MAYOR HODGES, STAY OUT OF
THE BRISKNESS IN MINNESOTA,
THANK YOU SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
THE SENATE RETURNED FROM ITS
HOLIDAY BREAK TODAY AND TOOK UP
THE ISSUE OF RESTORING LONG-TERM
UNEMPLOYMENT BENEFITS.
DEMOCRATS FAILED TO GET THE 60
VOTES NEEDED TO PROCEED ON THE
ISSUE, BUT THEY VOWED TO KEEP AT
IT.
WE'LL EXPLORE THE ISSUE FURTHER
AND TALK TO THE SECRETARY OF
LABOR LATER IN THE PROGRAM.
JANET YELLEN WON SENATE
CONFIRMATION THIS EVENING TO
LEAD THE FEDERAL RESERVE.
SHE'LL BE THE FIRST WOMAN TO RUN
THE CENTRAL BANK, TAKING OVER
FROM BEN BERNANKE WHO IS
STEPPING DOWN AFTER EIGHT YEARS
AS CHAIRMAN.
YELLEN HAS SERVED AS VICE CHAIR
FOR THE PAST THREE YEARS.
IN IRAQ, PRIME MINISTER
NOURI AL-MALIKI APPEALED TO THE
PEOPLE OF FALLUJAH TO DRIVE OUT
"AL-QAEDA" MILITANTS WHO SEIZED
CONTROL THERE LAST WEEK.
IRAQI TROOPS HAVE ENCIRCLED THE
SUNNI-DOMINATED CITY, BUT MALIKI
HAS NOT YET ORDERED THEM TO MOVE
IN.
WE'LL LOOK INTO WHAT'S BEHIND
THE GROWING CONFLICT, RIGHT
AFTER THE NEWS SUMMARY.
THE SAME AL-QAEDA GROUP THAT'S
ACTIVE IN IRAIS AQ LSO AT THE
TARGET OF NEW INFIGHTING AMONG
REBEL GROUPS IN SYRIA.
A COALITION OF OTHER FACTIONS
ATTACKED THE MILITANTS ON FRIDAY
IN ALEPPO AND IDLIB PROVINCE.
FIGHTING SPREAD TODAY TO THE
CITY OF RAQQA IN THE EAST.
PEACE TALKS TO END THREE WEEKS
OF FIGHTING IN SOUTH SUDAN ARE
STILL STALLED.
NEGOTIATIONS TECHNICALLY BEGAN
SATURDAY IN NEIGHBORING
ETHIOPIA, BUT THE TWO SIDES
HAVE YET TO HOLD
FACE-TO-FACE DISCUSSIONS.
IN SOUTH SUDAN TODAY, PRESIDENT
SALVA KIIR FAULTED THE AFRICAN
UNION AND UNITED NATIONS FOR NOT
DOING MORE TO HELP HIS
GOVERNMENT STOP A REBELLION.
>> THEY SHOULD HAVE COME OUT
VERY OPENLY CONDEMNING THESE
PEOPLE WHO TOOK THIS ACTION.
THERE WAS NO REASON.
BUT IF THEY HAVE DECIDED TO KEEP
QUIET, THAT MEANS, YOU KNOW, IT
IS THEIR FAILURE TO UPHOLD THE
CONSTITUTION AND THEIR
RESPONSIBILITIES.
>> Ifill: THE VIOLENCE HAS
KILLED MORE THAN 1,000 PEOPLE SO
FAR.
THE SUPREME COURT PUT A HOLD
TODAY ON SAME-SEX MARRIAGES IN
UTAH, AT LEAST FOR NOW.
THE HOLD WILL STAY IN EFFECT
WHILE THE STATE APPEALS A LOWER
COURT'S RULING THAT LIFTED A BAN
ON SAME-SEX MARRIAGES.
SINCE THAT DECISION, MORE THAN
900 GAY AND LESBIAN COUPLES HAVE
MARRIED IN UTAH.
LIZ CHENEY, DAUGHTER OF FORMER
VICE PRESIDENT DICK CHENEY, HAS
ENDED HER U.S. SENATE BID IN
WYOMING.
SHE'D MOUNTED A PRIMARY
CHALLENGE TO INCUMBENT
REPUBLICAN MIKE ENZI.
CHENEY DID NOT MENTION THE
RESULTING PARTY RIFT TODAY.
INSTEAD, IN A STATEMENT, SHE
SAID, "SERIOUS HEALTH ISSUES
HAVE RECENTLY ARISEN IN OUR
FAMILY, AND UNDER THE
CIRCUMSTANCES, I HAVE DECIDED TO
DISCONTINUE MY CAMPAIGN."
A PENNSYLVANIA WOMAN KNOWN AS
"JIHAD JANE" WAS SENTENCED TODAY
TO TEN YEARS IN FEDERAL PRISON.
COLLEEN LAROSE PLEADED GUILTY TO
PLOTTING TO KILL A SWEDISH
ARTIST IN 2009 FOR DEPICTING THE
PROPHET MUHAMMAD AS A DOG.
IN PHILADELPHIA TODAY, SHE TOLD
A FEDERAL JUDGE THAT SHE IS NO
LONGER OBSESSED WITH RADICAL
ISLAM.
THE COST OF KEEPING ASIAN CARP
FROM GETTING INTO THE GREAT
LAKES FROM THE MISSISSIPPI RIVER
COULD TOP $18-BILLION DOLLARS.
THE ARMY CORPS OF ENGINEERS GAVE
THAT FIGURE TODAY AS ITS HIGH-
END ESTIMATE TO STOP THE
INVASIVE SPECIES.
IT OFFERED EIGHT POSSIBLE PLANS,
FROM PHYSICALLY SEPARATING THE
WATERWAYS TO USING ELECTRIC
BARRIERS.
ON WALL STREET DAY,TO STOCKS
FELL TO START THE FIRST FULL
TRADING WEEK OF THE NEW YEAR.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
LOST NEARLY 45 POINTS TO CLOSE
AT 16,425.
THE NASDAQ FELL 18 POINTS TO
CLOSE AT 4,113.
ALSO AHEAD ON THE NEWSHOUR,
ESCALATING VIOLENCE AND UNREST
IN IRAQ.
TWO VIEWS ON THE POLITICAL FIGHT
OVER UNEMPLOYMENT BENITS,EF
PREVENTING ALZHEIMER'S BY TAKING
IT ON EARLY.
PLUS, EVERYTHING FROM THE CAR
YOU DRIVE TO THE CLOTHES YOU
WEAR CONNECTED TO THE INTERNET.
>> Woodruff: TODAY THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION ANNOUNCED IT WILL
ACCELERATE SALES AND DELIVERIES
OF MILITARY EQUIPMENT TO IRAQ,
AS THAT COUNTRY'S GOVERNMENT
CONTINUES TO FIGHT FOR CONTROL
OF TWO KEY CITIES.
GUNFIRE ECHOED ACROSS FALLUJAH
TODAY, AS AL-QAEDA MILITANTS
HELD ON IN THE CITY THEY OVERRAN
LAST WEEK, WHILE IRAQI ARMY
TANKS LINED THE OUTSKIRTS.
THE MILITARY HELD OFF AN ALL-OUT
ASSAULT.
INSTEAD, PRIME MINISTER NURI AL-
MALIKI URGED SUNNI TRIBAL
LEADERS TO HELP REMOVE THE
MILITANTS.
ONE OF THE LEADERS SAID MEETINGS
WERE UNDERWAY TO TRY TO RETURN
THE CITY TO GOVERNMENT CONTROL.
>> ( translated ): TRIBESMEN ARE
IN CONSTANT COMMUNICATION TO
IMPOSE SECURITY AND EXPEL ARMED
MEN OUT OF THE CITY.
WE ARE ABOUT TO RE-CALL THE
POLICE FORCES TO THE CITY TO
ASSUME SECURITY RESPONSIBILITY
AFTER THE ARTILLERY SHELLING
STOPS.
>> Woodruff: BUT IN THE STREETS,
AL-QAEDA FIGHTERS FROM THE
ISLAMIC STATE IN IRAQ AND THE
LEVANT WARNED OF RETRIBUTION.
>> ( translated ): THE
REVOLUTIONARIES OF OUR TRIBES IN
FALLUJAH HAVE RESOLVED TO PUNISH
THE TRIBESMEN WHO SUPPORT THE
SECTARIAN GOVERNMENT FORCES.
>> Woodruff: THE MILITANTS ALSO
SEIZED NEARBY RAMADI LAST WEEK,
ALSO IN ANBAR PROVINCE,
WHERE SUNNI HOSTILITY TO THE
SHI-ITE-LED GOVERNMENT IS
CENTERED.
IT BOILED OVER LAST APRIL WHEN
SECURITY FORCES ASSAULTED A
SUNNI PROTEST CAMP, SPARKING
MONTHS OF BOMBINGS ACROSS IRAQ.
ON SATURDAY, MALIKI WARNED
SUNNIS AGAINST AIDING
EXTREMISTS.
>> ( translated ): I AM CALLING
ON THOSE WHO ARE DELUDING
THEMSELVES TO RECONSIDER.
THEY HAVE BEEN INVOLVED, WITHOUT
KNOWING, IN SUPPORTING AL-QAEDA
PROJECTS AND PROTECTING IT IN
SEVERAL WAYS, INCLUDING GIVING
MEDIA AND POLITICAL SUPPORT.
>> Woodruff: FALLUJAH IS WHERE
AMERICAN TROOPS SUFFERED SOME OF
THEIR GREATEST LOSSES BEFORE THE
FINAL WITHDRAWAL TWO YEARS AGO.
YESTERDAY, SECRETARY OF STATE
JOHN KERRY RULED OUT SENDING
TROOPS BACK IN.
>> WE'RE NOT CONTEMPLATING
PUTTING BOOTS ON THE GROUND.
THIS IS THEIR FIGHT, BUT WE'RE
GOING TO HELP THEM IN THEIR
FIGHT.
>> Woodruff: TODAY, WHITE HOUSE
OFFICIALS SAID PART OF THAT HELP
WILL COME IN THE FORM OF NEW
SURVEILLANCE DRONES TO HELP
TRACK INSURGENTS.
SO HOW DID AL-QAEDA-LINKED
MILITANTS MAKE THESE GAINS IN
WESTERN IRAQ, AND WHAT IS AT
STAKE FOR THE U.S.?
FOR THAT WE TURN TO JAMES
JEFFREY, HE WAS THE U.S.
AMBASSADOR TO IRAQ FROM 2010-
2012 AND JANE ARRAF, SHE'S A
FREELANCER FOR AL JAZEERA
AMERICA AND THE CHRISTIAN
SCIENCE MONITOR WHO HAS BEEN
REPORTING FROM IRAQ SINCE 1991.
SHE SPENT EIGHT YEARS AS C.N.N'S
BAGHDAD BUREAU CHIEF.
GLAD TO HAVE YOU WITH US.
JANE ARRAF YOU WERE TELLING
ME THIS IS A SITUATION
BUILDING FOR MANY MONTHS.
>> IT HAS.
I THINK WHILE THE WEST WAS
IGNORING IRAQ, ESSENTIALLY
THE COUNTRY HAS BECOME
PARTITIONED.
AND IN FALLUJAH, FALLUJAH IS
LESS THAN 40 MILES FROM THE
CENTER OF BAGHDAD, RIGHT,
BUT TO GET TO FALLUJAH, YOU
HAVE TO PASS ROADBLOCKS, THE
ARMY HAS ESSENTIALLY SEALED
OFF THE TOWN, THE SAME WAY
THEY SEALED OFF OTHER SUNNI
AREAS.
IT'S BEEN A YEAR OF
GRIEVANCES, A YEAR OF
PROTESTS.
AND AS THE AMERICAN MILITARY
ALWAYS USED TO SAY AND THE
AMERICAN STATE DEPARTMENT,
THERE'S NO MILITARY SOLUTION
TO THIS.
BUT THE POLITICAL SOLUTION
THAT PEOPLE FEEL WE SHOULD
HAVE BEEN SEEING JUST HASN'T
BEEN THERE.
>> Woodruff: AND WHAT HAS
BEEN BEHIND PRIME MINISTER
MALIKI'S MOVE TO ISOLATE, TO
SEAL OFF THE SUNNIES IN THIS
PART OF THE COUNTRY, THE AN
BAR PROVINCE.
>> IT'S REALLY EASY TO SEE
THIS, I THINK, AS A
SECTARIAN CONFLICT, SUNNI
VERSUS SHI'A BUT I THINK
IT'S OVERSIMPLIFYING IT IN A
VERY COMPLICATED COUNTRY, IN
A REALLY COMPLICATED,
INCREASINGLY COMPLICATED
REGION.
AT THE HEART OF MALIKI'S
DECISIONS, I THINK, HAVING
COVERED HIM FOR MANY YEARS,
IS THE REAL FEAR THAT HIS
GOVERNMENT IS IN A
PRECARIOUS POSITION.
IT'S THE ONLY A LED
GOVERNMENT, ESSENTIALLY, IN
THE MIDDLE EAST AND HE
FIRMLY BELIEVES THAT GIVEN
HALF A CHANCE SUNNIS WILL
COME FROM ANBAR AND OTHER
PLACES, TEAR DOWN THE
BARRIERS IN THE GREEN ZONE
AND COME AND KILL THEM ALL.
IT'S THAT BASIC.
IT'S A FIGHT FOR SURVIVAL.
AND THAT IS AT THE HEART OF
IT.
>> AND THAT'S-- SO WHAT
AFFECT HAS THAT STRATEGY HAD
ON THE SUNNI POPULATION IN
IRAQ.
>> WELL IT HAS ISOLATED THEM
AND ALIENATED THEM.
THIS WOULD HAVE BEEN
BEARABLE IF IT WASN'T FORTHE
SITUATION IN SYRIA.
THAT HAS PROVIDED AN AL
QAEDA COUSIN GROUP, THE ISIS
GROUND TO DEVELOP THEMSELVES
TO DIG IN TO RECEIVE A GREAT
DEAL OF MONEY AND WEAPONS
AND RECRUITS FROM AROUND THE
MIDDLE EAST.
AND THEY'VE NOW UNITED WITH
THE REMNANTS OF THE FORMER
AL QAEDA IN IRAQ GROUP AND
WHAT WE SEE IS AL QAEDA
TAKING THE OFFENSIVE,
REALLY.
>> NOW THE AL QAEDA LINKED
MILITANTS ARE SUNNI AS WELL.
HOW MUCH SYMPATHY, HOW MUCH
ALLIANCE IS THERE BETWEEN
THEM AND THE SUNNI TRIBES IN
IRAQ?
>> WELL, IT'S ALMOST DOWN TO
A PERSONAL LEVEL.
IN GENERAL THE TRIBES WHO
REBELLED AGAINST THE AL
QAEDA CONTROLLED AREAS OF
ANBAR PROVINCE BACK IN 2006,
2007 HAVE GRIEVANCES AGAINST
AL QAEDA THAT AT THE MOMENT
GO MORE DEEP THAN THE
GRIEVANCES AGAINST THE IRAQI
GOVERNMENT.
IRAQ, REMEMBER, IS STILL
PRIMARILY 80% A KURDISH, A
SHI'A ARAB STATE, SO THERE
IS NO DANGER OF THE AL QAEDA
PEOPLE OVERRUNNING THE
COUNTRY.
THE QUESTION IS CONTROLLING
THESE AREAS, RIGHT NOW
MALIKI CAN CAUSEI COUNT ON
THE SUPPORT OF MOST OF THE
TRIBES IN THIS THREE WAY
BATTLE AGAINST AL QAEDA.
>> SO JANE, WE READ TODAY
THAT MALIKI, THAT GOVERNMENT
FORCES HAVE NOW SURROUNDED
FALLUJAH, AT LEAST THAT'S
THE WAY IT'S DESCRIBED IN
THE WIRE REPORT.
WHAT ARE YOU HEARING?
AND ARE THEY, ARE THEY IN,
AND THE MALIKI HAS CALLED ON
THE SUNNI TRIBAL LEADERS TO
DRIVE OUT THE AL QAEDA
MILITANTS ON THEIR OWN.
IS THAT SOMETHING THEY'RE
CAPABLE OF DOING?
>> THAT IS AN ABSOLUTELY,
EXTRAORDINARY STATEMENT.
BECAUSE REALLY WHAT WE'RE
TALKING ABOUT IS PEOPLE, LET
ALONE THE TRIBAL LEADERS,
WE'RE TALKING ABOUT A CITY
THAT IN 2003 WAS ESSENTIALLY
TAKEN OVER BY AL QAEDA.
THEY HAD RIGGED BOMBS IN A
LOT OF THE HOUSES.
THERE WERE TRIPWIRES ALMOST
EVERYWHERE.
AND WHAT WE'RE TALKING ABOUT
NOW IS ANOTHER VERSION OF AL
QAEDA.
THEY HAVE HAD A LOT OF
PRACTICE AND THEY'VE COME
FROM SYRIA WHERE THERE ARE
FOREIGN FIGHTERS, WHERE
THERE IS MONEY POURING IN.
THIS IS NOT AL QAEDA 2003.
AND WE'RE STILL A CITY OF
PEOPLE AND OF TRIBES WHO ARE
NOT THAT FOND OF THE IRAQI
GOVERNMENT.
HEY'TRE GOING TO FORM
ALLIANCES BUT ONE OF THE
THINGS WE HAVE TO REALLY
TALK ABOUT, I THINK, IS THE
AWAKENING, THE TRIBES HAVE
TURNED AGAINST AL QAEDA AND
FOUGHT WITH THE AMERICAN
FORCES.
AND THEN WERE ESSENTIALLY
ABANDONED BY THE UNITED
STATES.
THEIR LEADERS HAVE BEEN
ASSASSINATED.
THEY'RE THE PEOPLE WHO ARE
BEING CALLED TO FIGHT AL
QAEDA AND IT'S NOT THAT
CLEAR THEY'RE GOING TO.
>> Woodruff: THAT'S MY
QUESTION, AMBASSADOR JEFFREY
WHAT CAN WE LOOK TO HAPPEN.
MALIKI IS SAYING YOU DO
THIS.
BUT THEN HE'S GOT TROOPS ON
THE OUTSIDE OF THE TOWN, OF
THE CITY.
I MEAN CAN HIS FORCES YEAR
RUN AL QAEDA IF THEY WANT?
>> IN THE END HE'S GOT
ENOUGH HEAVY ARMOUR,
ARTILLERY AND HUNDREDS OF
THOUSANDS IT OF TROOPS.
SO HE CAN WIN ANY CONVENTIONAL
BATTLE.
THE QUESTION IS DOES HE WANT
TO DO THAT IN A CITY WITH
SOME 300,000 INHABITANTS.
WE BASICALLY HAD THE
INHABITANTS EVACUATED BEFORE
WE WENT IN IN 2004.
THE TRIBES CAN'T DO IT
ALONE.
BUT TOGETHER, THE HOPE IS
THAT THEY'LL PUT ENOUGH
PRESSURE ON AL QAEDA THAT
THEY WILL FADE BACK INTO THE
DESERT WHETHER THAT WILL
HAPPEN OR NOT WE HAVE TO
WAIT AND SEE.
>> Woodruff: MEANWHILE,
AMBASSADOR JEFFREY WHAT IS
THE INTEREST FOR THE UNITED
STATES HERE?
CLEARLY THE U.S. OPPOSED TO
AL QAEDA GETTING A FOOTHOLD.
BUT BEYOND THAT, WHAT DOES
THE U.S. WANT TO HAVE HAPPEN
AND HOW MUCH CAN IT AFFECT
IT.
>> I WOULD DISAGREE
RESPECTFULLY WITH SECRETARY
KERRY.
THIS IS OUR FIGHT.
WE FOUGHT THERE IN 22004.
WE FOUGHT THERE IN PART TO
DRIVE AL QAEDA OUT AFTER
THEY ESTABLISHED A FOOTHOLD.
MALIKI GOVERNMENT FOR ALL OF
ITS PROBLEMS IS STILL A
GOVERNMENT THAT IS A QUASI
ALLY ADVISOR, IT IS A
CONSTITUTIONAL REGIME, THEY
DO WORK ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
WITH MANY OF THE SUNNIS AND
MOST OF THE KURDS.
AND IT'S IN OUR INTEREST NOT
TO ALLOW AL QUITE -- AL
QAEDA TO ESTABLISH ANOTHER
FOOTHOLD THAT IS THE BASIC
PREMISE ON ALL OF OUR
ACTIONS.
AND WE'RE TAKING PRETTY GOOD
ACTIONS WITH THE ADDITIONAL
EQUIPMENT, THE DRONES, THE
HELL FIRE MISSILES, THE
ADVICE, THE INTELLIGENCE AND
SUCH.
WE PROBABLY NEED TO DO MORE.
AND WE NEED TO HAVE A
DIFFERENT ATTITUDE, I THINK,
IN HOW WE PITCH THIS.
BECAUSE PEOPLE ARE WATCHING
US IN IRAQ TO TRY TO FIND
OUT ARE WE IN THIS GAME.
NOT WITH GROUND TROOPS, NOT
WITH OUR SOLDERS FIGHTING,
BUT WITH SUPPORT FOR WHOFER,
BE IT MALIKI, BE IT THE
TRIBES WHO ARE WILLING TO
TAKE ON AL QAEDA, THAT IS
NOT COMPLETELY CLEAR YET.
>> Woodruff: JANE, HAVING
BEEN IN THE REGION SO
RECENTLY, IS THE VIEW OF THE
PEOPLE THERE THAT THE U.S.
IS OR ISN'T ENGAGED?
WHERE DO YOU SEE THIS GOING?
>> I THINK IT IS DEFINITELY
THE VIEW THAT THE U.S. ISN'T
ENGAGED AND HASN'T BEEN
ENGAGED FOR SOME TIME.
AND I THINK IT'S COMPLETELY
CLEAR IRAQIS DO NOT WANT TO
SEE U.S. TROOPS.
I ALSO DON'T THINK IT'S
CLEAR THOUGH THAT HELL FIRE
MISSILES AND DRONES ARE THE
ANSWER.
I MEAN THIS REALLY IS A
REGION THAT FEELS THAT IT'S
NOT A PART OF IRAQ.
WHEN I'VE BEEN THERE I HAVE
INTERVIEWED WOMEN WHO HAVE
BEEN IMPRISONED, PUT
PRESSURE ON THEIR HUSBANDS
TO CONFESS TO TERRORISM,
COUNTLESS EXECUTIONS THAT
TAKE PLACE, CHILDREN BEING
ROUNDED UP.
IT'S NOT JUST A MATTER,
REALLY, OF AL QAEDA
CONTROLLING FALLUJAH, IT'S A
MATTER OF IS THIS COUNTRY
ACTUALLY EVEN GOING TO,
WITHOUT.
YOU CAN'T CUT OFF FALLUJAH.
YOU CAN'T CUT OFF THE SUNNI
AREAS.
>> Woodruff: WELL, WE'RE
CERTAINLY GOING TO BE
WATCHING, JANE CAN ARRAF,
AMBASSADOR JAMES JEFFREY, WE
THANK YOU BOTH.
>> THANK YOU, JUDY.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Ifill: WE RETURN TO THE
DEBATE OVER EXTENDING
UNEMPLOYMENT INSURANCE BENEFITS,
THE SENATE WAS SLATED FOR A
VOTE BUT IT WAS DELAYED
UNTIL TOMORROW MORNING.
KWAME HOLMAN STARTS US
USOFF.
>> I'M OPTIMISTIC, CAUTIOUSLY
OPTIMISTIC, THAT THE NEW YEAR
WILL BRING A RENEWED SPIRIT OF
COOPERATION.
IT'S VERY BADLY NEEDED.
>> Reporter: SENATE DEMOCRATIC
LEADER HARRY REID BEGAN 2014
WITH A PUSH TO RESTORE EMERGENCY
BENEFITS FOR THE LONG-TERM
UNEMPLOYED.
THE PAYMENTS ENDED FOR 1.3
MILLION AMERICANS, ON DECEMBER
28th AND THE WHITE HOUSE SAYS
4.9 MILLION OTHERS WILL LOSE
BENEFITS THIS YEAR.
>> WE HAVE NEVER HAD SO MANY
UNEMPLOYED FOR SUCH A LONG TIME.
THE LONG-TERM UNEMPLOYMENT RATE
IS TWICE AS HIGH AS IT WAS ANY
OTHER TIME WE'VE ALLOWED
EMERGENCY UNEMPLOYMENT BENEFITS
TO END.
>> Reporter: THE CURRENT PROGRAM
BEGAN UNDER PRESIDENT GEORGE W.
BUSH IN 2008.
IT OFFERS EXTENDED FEDERAL
BENEFITS AFTER THE EXPIRATION OF
STATE BENEFITS.
ON AVERAGE IT MEANS ABOUT $300 A
WEEK FOR SOMEONE OUT OF WORK.
THIS NEW BILL, SPONSORED BY
DEMOCRAT JACK REED OF RHODE
ISLAND AND REPUBLICAN DEAN
HELLER OF NEVADA, WOULD EXTEND
THE FEDERAL PROGRAM FOR ANOTHER
THREE MONTHS.
PRESIDENT OBAMA'S CHIEF ECONOMIC
ADVISOR -- GENE SPERLING --
SPOKE AT THE WHITE HOUSE
TODAY...
>> THE CLEAR RIGHT THING FOR US
TO DO RIGHT NOW IS PASS THIS
MEASURE NOW IN ITS CURRENT FORM.
AND AGAIN, IT'S JUST FOR THREE
MONTHS.
IT GIVES MORE TIME TO HAVE THOSE
TYPE OF-- YOU KNOW, FURTHER
BIPARTISAN DISCUSSIONS ABOUT
WHAT ELSE YOU MIGHT DO TO EXTEND
IT AFTER THAT.
>> Reporter: BUT A NUMBER OF
REPUBLICANS-- INCLUDING
SAY THE COST MUST BE OFFSET BY
SPENDING CUTS ELSEWHERE IN THE
FEDERAL BUDGET.
WITHIN IT'S A TOTAL
VIOLATION OF FISCAL
RESPONSIBILITY.
IT JUST IS.
IF JUST IS.
I WISH IF WEREN'T SO.
I WISH WE COULD JUST DO THIS
AND IT WOULDN'T COST
ANYTHING.
>> THE PRESIDENT MEANS TO
STEP UP THE PRESSURE ON
CONGRESS TOMORROW WHEN HE
HOSTS A WHITE HOUSE EVENT
FOR PEOPLE WHO'VE LOST
BENEFITS.
>> Ifill: NOW WE LOOK MORE
CLOSELY AT THE BROADER POLITICAL
FIGHT BREWING THIS ELECTION
YEAR.
FIRST, THE CASE MADE BY THE
PRESIDENT'S TEAM.
THOMAS PEREZ IS THE SECRETARY OF
LABOR.
HE JOINED US FROM THE WHITE
HOUSE EARLIER THIS EVENING.
SECRETARY PEREZ, THANK YOU
FOR JOINING US.
>> MY PLEASURE.
>> Ifill: THE UNEMPLOYMENT
INSURANCE BENEFITS HAVE BEEN
EXTENDED NOW 11 TIMES.
WHAT DO YOU THINK IS THE
RISK OF NOT EXTENDING THEM
AGAIN?
>> WELL, THERE ARE 1.3
MILLION AMERICANS WHO WERE
SUPPOSED TO RECEIVE THEIR
CHECK TODAY BUT THEY DIDN'T.
BECAUSE THE PROGRAM HAS NOT
BEEN RENEWED.
AND SO IMMEDIATELY THEY'VE
GONE FROM SITUATION OF DIRE
NEED TO ONE OF CATASTROPHE.
AND THAT'S NOT SIMPLY 1.3
MILLION BUT THAT'S ALSO
THEIR FAMILY MEMBERS.
AND SO THAT'S WHY IT'S SO
IMPORTANT FOR CONGRESS TO
ACT IMMEDIATELY TO RESTORE
THESE PROGRAMS.
AND I'M VERY HEARTENED BY
THE FACT THAT THERE IS A
BIPARTISAN BILL IN FRONT OF
THE SENATE, WITH SENATOR
REID FROM RHODE ISLAND AND
SENATOR HELL FRERE NEVADA.
BECAUSE THIS PROGRAM HAS
ALWAYS ENJOYED BIPARTISAN
SUPPORT.
AND I'M CONFIDENT AND
HOPEFUL THAT THIS TIME IT
WILL BE NO DIFFERENT.
>> Ifill: EXCEPT THAT LAST
NOSE COUNT IT DIDN'T LOOK
LIKE THE DEMOCRATS OR
MR. HELLER HAD THE VOTES TO
GET TO THAT 60 VOTE
THRESHOLD TO CONSIDER
DEBATE.
DO YOU KNOW DIFFERENTLY?
>> MY ROLE IS NOT AS A VOTE
COUNTER HERE BUT I CAN GIVE
YOU A SENSE OF HISTORY.
WHICH IS THAT CONGRESS HAS
ALWAYS ON A BIPARTISAN BASIS
SUPPORTED EMERGENCY
UNEMPLOYMENT COMPENSATION.
WHEN PRESIDENT BUSH WAS IN
OFFICE, FIVE TIMES, THE BILL
WAS PASSED.
NO STRINGS ATTACHED.
ANY OF THOSE TIMES.
AND SO I'M CONFIDENT AND
HOPEFUL THAT THIS WILL PASS.
AND IF IT DOESN'T, IT IS NOT
SIMPLY AFFECTS THE 1.3
MILLION PEOPLE WHO ARE NO
LONGER HAVE THEIR BENEFITS
AND THEIR FAMILIES.
BUT IT ALSO HAS A NEGATIVE
IMPACT ON THE ECONOMY.
THERE HAVE BEEN A NUMBER OF
STUDIES THAT HAVE SHOWN THAT
SOMEWHERE BETWEEN 2 AND
300,000 JOBS WOULD BE LOST
BECAUSE WHEN PEOPLE HAVE
LESS MONEY IN THEIR POCKETS,
THEY SPEND LESS.
COMPANIES HIRE LESS BECAUSE
THEY'RE SELLING LESS.
AND THE ECONOMY CONTRACTS.
THAT'S AN UNNECESSARY
SITUATION.
IT CAN BE AVOIDED.
AND IT CAN BE AVOIDED SIMPLY
BY EXTENDING EMERGENCY
UNEMPLOYMENT COMPENSATION
FOR THREE MONTHS.
AND HOPEFULLY DURING THAT
TIME A LONGER-TERM AGREEMENT
CAN BE WORKED OUT.
>> Ifill: ARE YOU CONCERNED
THAT THE CONTINUED NEED FOR
A PROGRAM LIKE THIS MIGHT
POINT TO AN UNDERLYING
PROBLEM WITH THE ECONOMY
THAT IS PERHAPS TO THE BEING
ADDRESSED?
>> WELL, THIS-- EXTENDING
UNEMPLOYMENT INSURANCE
BENEFITS ON AN EMERGENCY
BASIS IS CERTAINLY NOT THE
ONLY STRATEGY THAT WE'RE
UNDERTAKING RIGHT NOW.
WE HAVE SEEN 45 CONSECUTIVE
MONTHS OF PRIVATE SECTOR JOB
GROWTH TO THE TUNE OF OVER 8
MILLION JOBS.
BUT THAT'S NOT ENOUGH.
WE NEED TO PICK UP THE PACE
OF GROWTH.
AND THE LONG-TERM
UNEMPLOYMENT RATE RIGHT NOW
IS AT A HISTORIC HIGH.
ONE ASPECT OF THE RECOVERY
FROM THE GREAT RECESSION IS
JUST THAT.
THE AVERAGE DURATION OF
UNEMPLOYMENT IN 2007 OR 2008
WHEN PRESIDENT BUSH FIRST
SIGNED THE EXTENSION WAS 17
WEEKS.
AND THE UNEMPLOYMENT RATE
WAS SOMETHING LIKE 5.6 OR
5.7 PERCENT.
NOW THE AVERAGE DURATION IS
36 WEEKS.
AND WHAT WE HAVE TO DO IN
ADDITION TO EXTENDING
EMERGENCY UNEMPLOYMENT
COMPENSATION IS PASS THE
PRESIDENT'S JOBS AGENDA.
HE'S PUT FORTH A VERY
FORWARD-LEANING PROPOSAL TO
HELP US INVEST IN OUR
INFRASTRUCTURE, TAX CUTS FOR
BUSINESSES THAT WOULD ENABLE
ONE TIME REVENUES THAT WOULD
ALLOW US TO EXPAND
INFRASTRUCTURE WHEN WE
PASSED IMMIGRATION REFORM.
THAT WILL GROW THE ECONOMY.
THE BEST WAY TO ADDRESS AND
ATTACK THE LONG-TERM
UNEMPLOYMENT PROBLEM IS TO
GROW THE ECONOMY.
TO EXPAND GDP.
AND THAT'S WHAT THE
PRESIDENT WANTS TO DO.
>> PARDON ME FOR
INTERRUPTING.
BUT SOME REPUBLICAN WAS
OBJECT TO THIS PARTICULAR
PROPOSAL, THIS DEAN HELLER
JACK REID PROPOSAL ARE
SAYING THAT THEY DON'T
OBJECT TO THE IDEA OF
EXPANDING BENEFITS OR
RENEWING BENEFITS.
THEY OBJECT TO THE IDEA THAT
WE'RE NOT PAYING FOR IT.
IS THAT NOT A REASONABLE
ARGUMENT.
>> WELL, CERTAINLY WHEN
PRESIDENT BUSH SIGNED FIVE
EXTENSIONS THERE WERE NO
STRINGS ATTACHED.
WHEN PRESIDENT BUSH SIGNED
IT.
I BELIEVE 14 OUT OF THE LAST
17 EXTENSIONS OF
UNEMPLOYMENT BENEFITS HAVE
BEEN SIGNED WITH NO STRINGS
ATTACHED.
SO HISTORICALLY THERE HAVE
BEEN AN UNDERSTANDING THAT
WE CALL IT EMERGENCY
UNEMPLOYMENT COMPENSATION
FOR A REASON.
BECAUSE PEOPLE ARE IN A
STATE OF EMERGENCY.
AND WE'RE TALKING ABOUT A
BILL HERE THAT IS OF THREE
MONTH DURATION.
AND DURING THAT PERIOD OF
TIME I'M HOPEFUL THAT
CONGRESS CAN WORK TOGETHER
ON A BIPARTISAN FASHION,
ONCE AGAIN TO COME UP WITH A
LONGER-TERM FIX.
>> I HEARD YOU MENTION
MINIMUM WAGE AND
IMMIGRATION.
I'M WONDERING IF THIS IS THE
BEGINNING OF A BIGGER FIGHT
ON THE ADMINISTRATION'S PART
ON THESE ECONOMIC ISSUES?
>> WELL, I THINK WE HAVE TO
DO EVERYTHING TO PUT PEOPLE
BACK TO WORK, TO HELP PEOPLE
HAVE THOSE-- THAT LIFELINE
WHILE THEY'RE LOOKING FOR
WORK.
AND TO MAKE SURE THAT WORK
PAYS A DECENT WAGE.
NOBODY SHOULD HAVE
TO-- NOBODY WHO WORKS A
FULL-TIME JOB SHOULD BE
LIVING IN POVERTY.
AND THERE ARE SO MANY PEOPLE
WHO ARE.
AND THAT IS WHY THE
PRESIDENT AND I AND SO MANY
OTHERS ON A BIPARTISAN BASIS
SO STRONGLY SUPPORT AN
INCREASE IN THE MINIMUM
WAGE.
BUT THAT'S NOT ENOUGH,
EITHER.
WE DO SO MUCH AT THE
DEPARTMENT OF LABOR, FOR
INSTANCE, TO INVEST IN
SKILLS.
SO THAT PEOPLE HAVE THE
TOOLS NECESSARY TO COMPETE
FOR TODAY AND TOMORROW'S
JOBS AND HAVE THOSE LADDERS
OF OPPORTUNITY TO THE MIDDLE
CLASS.
AND THESE WIDE-RANGING
INVESTMENTS THAT THE
PRESIDENT HAS BEEN PUTTING
FORTH, ARE REALLY A
MULTIFACETED STRATEGY FOR
GROWING THE MIDDLE CLASS,
FOR INSURANCING THAT WE CAN
LIFT PEOPLE OUT OF POVERTY.
AND GIVING THAT CRITICAL
LIFELINE TO THOSE WHO ARE IN
A SITUATION OF LONG-TERM
UNEMPLOYMENT LIEU NO FAULT
OF THEIR OWN.
>> BUT IS THERE ANY ROOM AT
ALL FOR BIPARTISAN AGREEMENT
AS YOU KEEP ELUDING TO IN AN
ELECTION YEAR LIKE THIS?
>> OH, I THINK SO.
I WAS WORKING, FOR SENATOR
KENNEDY IN 1996.
PEOPLE SAY THAT YOU CAN'T
GET ANYTHING PASSED IN A
PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION YEAR.
WELL, YOU LOOK BACK ON THAT
YEAR, THE MINIMUM WAGE WAS
INCREASED.
THERE WAS A HATE CRIMES
BILL-PASSED.
WELFARE REFORM PASSED.
IMMIGRATION REFORM PASSED.
THERE WAS A MAJOR HEALTH
REFORM BILL THAT PASSED, ALL
IN A PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION
YEAR.
SO IT CAN BE DONE.
IT HAS BEEN DONE.
AND I THINK RIGHT NOW YOU
LOOK AT THE SITUATION ACROSS
AMERICA, TOO MANY PEOPLE ARE
WORKING HARD AND FALLING
FURTHER BEHIND.
>> Ifill: SECRETARY OF LABOR
THOMAS PEREZ, THANK YOU SO
MUCH.
>> THANK
>> Ifill: AND NOW FOR THE
ALTERNATE VIEW, WE TURN TO
DOUGLAS HOLTZ-EAKIN, FORMER
DIRECTOR OF THE CONGRESSIONAL
BUDGET OFFICE UNDER PRESIDENT
GEORGE W. BUSH.
HE'S NOW THE PRESIDENT OF THE
AMERICAN ACTION FORUM, A
CONSERVATIVE THINK TANK.
SO THE WHITE HOUSE SAYS THAT
BENEFITS NEED TO BE
INCREASED AT THIS EMERGENCY
UNEMPLOYMENT INSURANCE NEEDS
TO BE EXTENDED.
WHAT'S THE ARGUMENT AGAINST
THAT?
>> WELL, I THINK THE FIRST
THING IS TO AGREE WITH THE
FACT THERE'S A REAL PROBLEM.
AND THAT THE BEST SOLUTION
WOULD BE BETTER STRATEGIES
FOR MORE RAPID ECONOMIC
GROWTH.
AND GETTING PEOPLE JOBS AND
INCREASES IN INCOME.
>> IT REALLY DOESN'T HELP.
SO I THINK THAT IS THE KEY
AND THE PRESIDENT SPENT TIME
ON BIPARTISAN APPROACHES FOR
BETTER ECONOMIC GROWTH WOULD
BE I THINK A MORE FUTUREFUL
PATH THAN TO PUSH ON THIS.
THE SECOND IS SIMPLY TO BE
CLEAR ABOUT MATCHING
PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS.
IF THE PROBLEM IS SOMEONE
CAN'T FIND A JOB BECAUSE
THEY DON'T HAVE THE SKILLS
AND THEY NEED SOME
RETRAINING, EXTENDING
EMERGENCY UNEMPLOYMENT ISN'T
GOING TO SOLVE THAT YOU NEED
THE JOB TRAINING PROGRAMS
ARE FOR THE SKILLS BILLS
THAT COME OUT OF THE HOUSE,
SITTING IN THE SENATE.
IF YOU HAVE A PROBLEM WHERE
YOU HAVE JUST POVERTY,
LONG-TERM INSURANCE BENEFITS
FOR AN EMERGENCY AREN'T
GOING TO FIX THAT EITHER.
YOU HAVE TO FIX THE SOCIAL
SAFETY NET.
UNEMPLOYMENT INSURANCE WAS
MEANT TO BE A BRIDGE FOR
TEMPORARY SPELLS OF
UNEMPLOYMENT.
AND EVEN THERE IT CUTS BOTH
WAYS.
THE GOOD NEWS IS PEOPLE HAVE
SOME INCOME.
THEY CAN TAKE SOME TIME TO
FIND A JOB AND HAVE ONE THAT
MATCHES.
THE BAD NEWS IS ALL THE
EVIDENCE IS THAT THE LONGER
YOU HAVE UNEMPLOYMENT
INSURANCE, THE LONGER PEOPLE
STAY OUT OF WORK, THEIR
SKILLS ERODE.
THE JOB THEY ULTIMATELY GET
PAID LESS.
AND THAT'S NOT TO THEIR
BENEFIT.
SO THE QUESTION BECOMES WHAT
IS THE RIGHT LENGTH OF
UNEMPLOYMENT INSURANCE.
HERE'S THE DEBATE, 26 WEEKS
WHICH IS THE SAFETY NET
RIGHT NOW VERSUS EFFECTIVELY
40 WEEKS, SO SIX AND A HALF
MONTHS TO TEN MONTHS WHICH
IS WHAT IS AT PLAY IN THE
SENATE.
AND WE DON'T KNOW THE
SCIENTIFIC ANSWER.
>> Ifill: YOU PUT A LOT OF
THINGS OUT THERE.
I WANT TO GO ONE THAT YOU
MENTIONED IS THAT IT IS A
PATCH, IT IS A TEMPORARY
PATCH.
WE JUST HEARD SECRETARY
PEREZ SAY THIS IS THE KIND
OF PATCH THAT WAS APPLIED
JUST FINE IN THE BUSH YEARS
WITHOUT STRINGS ATTACHED.
IS THAT NOT-- IS HE
INCORRECT ABOUT THAT?
>> HE MAY HAVE BEEN BUT I
THINK WE ALL KNOW THE
BUDGETARY ENVIRONMENT WE
LIVE IN.
WE KNOW THAT THE TROUBLING
FUTURE FOR FEDERAL DEFICITS,
THEY SHOULD PAY FOR
EVERYTHING.
THIS SHOULDN'T BE SPECIAL ON
THIS BILL OR ANOTHER ONE.
THE CONGRESS HAS TO GET
SERIOUS ABOUT CONTROLLING
SPENDING.
>> WHAT ABOUT THE ARGUMENT
MADE WHICH IS BY PUTTING
MORE MONEY IN THE POCKETS OF
PEOPLE WHO NEED IT, EVEN IF
FOR A TEMPORARY PERIOD OF
TIME, YOU PUT MORE MONEY
INTO THE ECONOMY.
>> IT'S RIGHT, IT'S JUST NOT
THAT BIG.
IF IT WAS A HUGE IMPACT,
THEN THE STIMULUS BILL WOULD
HAVE BEEN AN AMAZING SUCCESS
AND WE WOULDN'T BE HAVING
THIS CONVERSATION RIGHT NOW.
SO YES, TRUE, BUT LET'S GET
THE MAGNITUDE STRAIGHT.
THIS ISN'T THAT BIG.
>> UNTIL YOU CAN FIGURE OUT
THE LONGER-TERM FIX, WHAT'S
WRONG WITH THIS THREE MONTH,
WHAT IS IT, $6 BILLION FIX
WHICH IS BEING MENTIONED,
6.5 BILLION FIX WHICH IS
BEING DEBATED RIGHT NOW ON
CAPITOL HILL?
>> WELL, ON A POLICY BASIS,
THE TWO QUESTIONS ARE ONE,
ARE YOU GOING TO PAY FOR IT
OR NOT.
I AT LEAST THINK YOU OUGHT
TO PAY FOR EVERYTHING.
>> EVEN IF IT IS TEMPORARY.
>> ABSOLUTELY.
THERE ISN'T A GOOD EXCUSE
FOR NOT PAYING ATTENTION TO
THE FISCAL OUTLOOK AT THIS
POINT.
THOSE DAYS ARE GONE.
AND THE SECOND ONE IS WELL,
WE WANT TO HAVE A BRIDGE.
BUT WE WANT TO HAVE A BRIDGE
THAT WORKS TO THE EFFECT OF
HELP WORKERS NOT HARM THEM
IN THE END SO WHAT IS THE
RIGHT LENGTH.
CAN YOU CAN MAKE A PRINCIPALLED
ARGUMENT FOR 40 OR 26 WHICH
IS WHAT WE HAVE IF WE DON'T
EXTEND IT.
>> SO WHAT IS THE IMMEDIATE
SOLUTION OR LIKELY SOLUTION
OR POSSIBLE SOLUTION THAT
YOU WOULD PREFER FOR THE
LONG-TERM UNDERLYING PROBLEM
OF LONG-TERM UNEMPLOYMENT.
>> THERE ARE THINGS THAT FOR
EXAMPLE THE PRESIDENT HAS
PROPOSED AND TALKED ABOUT
BUT NOT SERIOUS-- I WOULD
SAY TAX REFORM WOULD BE
NUMBER ONE.
A LOT OF AGREEMENTS, OUR
COMPANIES ARE NOT
INTERNATIONALLY EXPECT ANY
THE TAX CODE.
A LOT OF AGREEMENT THAT WE
GET A BOOST TO SHORT-TERM
ECONOMIC GROWTH FOR TAX
REFORM.
FOR GETTING REAL TAX REFORM
MOVING THROUGH THE CONGRESS.
FORMER SENATE FINANCE
CHAIRMAN MAX BECAUSE CAUSE
NOW LEADING AMBASSADOR TO
CHINA SPENT A LOT OF TIME
THIS.
THERE IS A BIPARTISAN
UNDERPINNING FOR IT.
THE WHITE HOUSE NEEDS TO
WEIGH IN ON A SERIOUS WAY.
>> Ifill: I I HAVE TO ASK
YOU THE SAME QUESTION I
ASKED SECRETARY PEREZ WHICH
IS THIS IDEA OF GRAND
BIPARTISANSHIP THAT CAN BE
REACHED IN A ELECTION YEAR,
HOW CAN THAT HAPPEN?
>> THE ONLY WAY YOU GET
BIPARTISANSHIP IS GREAT
WHITE HOUSE LEADERSHIP.
CONGRESS IS FUNDAMENTALLY A
PARTISAN PLACE AND THE WHITE
HOUSE HAS TO BROKER THOSE
DEALS.
>> Ifill: ARE WE HAVING WHEN
IT COMES RIGHT DOWN TO IT,
ESPECIALLY WHEN IT COMES TO
ISSUES LIKE UNEMPLOYMENT,
ESPECIALLY RIGHT AFTER THE
HOLIDAY, ARE WE HAVING AN
ECONOMIC ARGUMENT HERE, OR
ARE WE HAVING AN EMOTIONAL
ONE?
>> OH THIS IS A GREAT
POLITICAL ARGUMENT, A VERY
EMOTIONAL ONE AM BUT I
ALWAYS THINK THAT EVEN
THOUGH THAT'S TRUE, IT'S
IMPORTANT TO STEP BACK AND
LOOK AT THE FACTSMENT FIGURE
OUT WHAT IS BIG, WHAT IS
SMALL.
AND ALWAYS TARGET THE
SOLUTION AND THE POLICY
CORRECTLY.
DON'T TRY TO SOLVE THE WRONG
PROBLEM WITH UNEMPLOYMENT
INSURANCE.
>> Woodruff: .
>> Ifill: WITH WHAT IS THE
WRONG PROBLEM.
>> THERE A BIG PROBLEM WITH
SKILLS AM WE NEED BETTER
TRAINING PROGRAMS, WE DO
NEED A WAY TO GET PEOPLE
FROM CAREERS THAT ARE
DEADEND INTO NEW CAREERS.
UNEMPLOYMENT INSURANCE DOES
NOT DO THAT.
>> Ifill: AND WHAT IS THE
POLITICAL PROBLEM?
>> THE POLITICAL PROBLEM
HERE FOR THE WHITE HOUSE IS
THEY HAVE A BAD ECONOMIC
RECORD.
THEY WANT TO CHANGE THE
SUBJECT AND STOP POINTING
FINGERS THIS IS A GOOD WAY
TO DO IT.
>> Ifill: DOUGLAS
HOLTZ-EAKIN, THANK YOU SO
MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE
REMAINS AMONG THE MOST
DEVASTATING DISEASES THAT
MEDICINE HAS YET TO CRACK.
THERE'S NO KNOWN CURE OR
TREATMENT THAT HAS SUBSTANTIALLY
HELPED CURB MEMORY LOSS AND THE
DECLINE IN COGNITIVE SKILLS.
ONE IN EIGHT AMERICANS OVER THE
AGE OF 65 HAS ALZHEIMER'S.
NOW, RESEARCHERS ARE HOPING THEY
CAN FIND A MORE PROMISING FUTURE
BY INTERVENING WELL BEFORE ANY
SYMPTOMS SHOW.
JEFFREY BROWN HAS THE STORY.
>> THIS IS MY FATHER AT A
FATHER/DAUGHTER DANCE IN HIGH
SCHOOL
>> Reporter: AT AGE 48, JAMIE
TYRONE DECIDED ON A WHIM TO SIGN
UP FOR A STUDY THAT OFFERED
GENETIC TESTING FOR 22 DISEASES.
THIS IS MY MOTHER AND MY FATHER
AT MY WEDDING DAY.
>> Reporter: THE RESULTS WERE
SHOCKING AND LIFE CHANGING.
HAVE A 91% LIFETIME RISK OF
GETTING ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE.
>> Reporter: ALZHEIMER'S, A
DEBILITATING FORM OF DEMENTIA,
WAS NOT EVEN ON TYRONE'S RADAR
SCREEN-- SHE'D HAD NO SYMPTOMS.
AND HEARING THE NEWS SENHERT
INTO AN EMOTIONAL TAILSPIN.
>> I WAS VERY, VERY LONELY AND
VERY, VERY ISOLATED.
AT ONE POINT, I WAS TOLD IT WAS
PROBABLY BEST NOT TO TALK ABOUT
IT BECAUSE YOU MIGHT BE
DISCRIMINATED AGAINST, SO I WENT
INTO A REALLY DARK HOLE.
>> Reporter: ALL THIS BEGAN FIVE
YEARS AGO.
IRONICALLY, JUST AS HER FATHER
BEGAN SHOWING SIGNS OF MENTAL
CONFUSION.
TYRONE WATCHED AS HIS HEALTH
QUICKLY DECLINED.
HE WAS EVENTUALLY DIAGNOSED WITH
ALZHEIMER'S.
>> WHEN MY FATHER WAS STILL
ALIVE, AND I LOOKED AT HIM, ALL
I SAW WAS MY DESTINY.
AND I WAS FRIGHTENED FOR ME, BUT
I WAS MORE FRIGHTENED FOR MY
FAMILY, BECAUSE I DIDN'T WANT--
I DON'T WANT THEM TO GO THROUGH
WHAT WE WERE GOING THROUGH WITH
MY FATHER.
>> Reporter: AND HER STORY IS
NOW PART OF A NEW APPROACH TO
EXPERIMENTAL ALZHEIMER'S
RESEARCH-- TREATING PEOPLE FOR
THE DISEASE BEFORE THEY SHOW A
SINGLE SYMPTOM.
>> I'M GOING TO ASK YOU A BUNCH
OF QUESTIONS THAT DEAL WITH
MEMORY AND THINKING AND I WANT
YOU TO JUST TAKE YOUR TIME AND
RELAX.
>> Reporter: TYRONE VOLUNTEERED
FOR A BIOMARKER STUDY AT BANNER
ALZHEIMER'S INSTITUTE IN
ARIZONA.
HERE,HE I SS GIVEN COGNITIVE
TESTS, MEDICAL SCREENING, AND
BRAIN IMAGING.
>> I PANIC EVERY TIME I GO
THROUGH IT BECAUSE IM LIKE OH MY
GOODNESS, IF I FORGET SOMETHING,
DO I HAVE ALZHEIMER'S?
>> Reporter: SO FAR, HER TESTS
HAVE BEEN ENCOURAGING.
>> SO, YOU GOT 27 OUT OF 30,
WHICH IS NORMAL JAMIE WHEW!
THE BIOMARKER STUDY TYRONE
ENTERED IS PART OF AN AMBITIOUS
GOAL SET BY BANNER, TO PREVENT
AND EVEN ERADICATE THE DISEASE.
>> IT'S INCURABLE, ITS
DEBILITATING, ITS RELENTLESS,
AND ITS UNACCEPTABLE.
>> Reporter: DR. PIERRE TARIOT
IS ON A TEAM OF DOCTORS THAT
LAUNCHED THE ALZHEIMER'S
PREVENTION INITIATIVE.
WE THINK THE BEST WAY TO FIND A,
WITHOUT LOSING ANOTHER
GENERATION, IS MOVING EARLIER.
ONE NEW STUDY WILL INVOLVE
PEOPLE WHO DON'T HAVE ANY
SYMPTOMS BUT ARE  AT HIGH RISK--
BECAUSE THEY CARRY TWO COPIES OF
A GENE CALLED A-PO E-FOUR.
>> EVIDENCE THAT LIFESTYLES
MATTER
>> Reporter: AND WHILE JAMIE
TYRONE FITS THAT GENETIC
PROFILE, SHE IS TOO YOUNG TO
PARTICIPATE, THE TRIAL WILL
TRACK PEOPLE 60 TO 75-YEAR-OLD.
>> IF WE LEARN THAT MAKING THIS
RED GOES AWAY, OR WE PREVENT IT
FROM OCCURRING...
>> Reporter: LAST SUMMER, THE
STUDY RECEIVED A BIG BOOST, 33.2
MILLION DOLLARS, FROM THE
NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH.
>> WE AND OTHERS REALLY THINK
THAT THE WAY TO PUT THIS DISEASE
BEHIND US IS TO FIND THERAPIES
THAT ATTACK THE UNDERLYING
BIOLOGY, AND APPLY THEM RIGHT
AWAY, AT THE RIGHT TIME, AND IF
WE CAN DO THAT, WE MAY BE ABLE
TO PRESERVE THE INDEPENDENCE AND
AUTONOMY, WHICH IS THE GOAL.
>> THE AREA OF BLUE IS LITTLE
AMYLOID PROTIEN DEPOSITS
>> Reporter: ONE LONG-HELD
HYPOTHESIS IS THAT A BUILDUP OF
AMYLOID PROTEIN IN THE BRAIN IS
THE MAIN CULPRIT IN THE ONSET OF
ALZHEIMER'S.
THESE NEW TRIALS WILL TEST DRUGS
AIMED AT HALTING THAT
PROGRESSION.
>> WE'LL BE COMPARING CHANGE IN
PEOPLE WHO GET ACTIVE TREATMENT,
VERSUS A PLACEBO, OR A SHAM
TREATMENT, AND OUR HYPOTHESIS IS
TREATMENT WILL SLOW DOWN, OR
POSSIBLY EVEN PREVENT THE
OTHERWISE ALMOST CERTAIN LOSS OF
MEMORY.
>> Reporter: SO FAR,  DRUG
TRIALS TO TREAT PEOPLE WHO
ALREADY HAVE THE DISEASE HAVE
PROVEN DISAPPOINTING.
>> THERE HAS BEEN A SIGNIFICANT
PARADIGM SHIFT IN JUST THE LAST
COUPLE OF YEARS.
MAYBE USING THESE PROMISING
EXPERIMENTAL AGENTS AT A TIME
WHEN THE DISEASE IS ALREADY
RAVAGED THE BRAIN IS TOO LATE,
SO MAYBE WHAT WE OUGHT TO DO IS
INTERVENE AT THE VERY BEGINNING,
BEFORE DAMAGED HAS OCCURRED, AND
SYMPTOMS EMERGED, SO THAT'S A
BIG PIVOT, A BIG CHANGE IN THE
FIELD.
>> Reporter: IT IS ALSO RAISES
NEW ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS TO
ADMINISTER ALZHEIMER'S TREATMENT
TO PEOPLE WITH NO CURRENT
SYMPTOMS.
>> IN EVERY CASE IT BOILS DOWN
TO THE ABILITY FOR EVERYBODY TO
APPRECIATE POTENTIAL RISKS, AND
THE POTENTIAL BENEFITS, BENEFITS
FOR ONESELF, BENEFITS FOR ONES
FAMILY, OR FUTURE GENERATIONS
>> YOU'RE GOING TO DRAW TREES IN
THE BACKGROUND, YOURS IS LOOKING
GREAT!
>> Reporter: FOR PEOPLE WHO
ALREADY HAVE ALZHEIMER'S, THE
INSTITUTE CREATES ENVIRONMENTS,
LIKE THIS ART CLASS, WHERE
PATIENTS CAN FEEL PRODUCTIVE AND
SUCCESSFUL.
>> I THINK IT WORKS FOR PEOPLE
WHO HAVE ALZHEIMER'S BECAUSE
EVERYDAY THEY FACE FAILURE,
BECAUSE THEIR MEMORY, THEIR
BRAIN CAN'T KEEP PACE.
BUT AS I TELL PEOPLE WITH THIS
DISEASE, LOOK, NOT ALL OF YOUR
BRAIN IS NOT WORKING, THERE ARE
PARTS THAT WORK BEAUTIFULLY, AND
ART IS ONE OF THOSE AREAS THAT
WORK BEAUTIFULLY
>> Reporter: ACCORDING TO THE
ALZHEIMER'S ASSOCIATION, 5.2
MILLION AMERICANS ARE AFFECTED
BY THE DISEASE.
A NEW DIAGNOSIS IS MADE EVERY 68
SECONDS AND THE NUMBER OF CASES
IS EXPECTED TO TRIPLE BY 2050.
>> THE WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION
HAS LABELED ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE
AS THE COMING PANDEMIC OF
WESTERN SOCIETY IN THIS CENTURY.
PREDICTING THAT AS WE AGE
SUCESSFULLY, THE NUMBERS WILL
BECOME SO EXTRAORDINARY THAT
UNLESS WE FIND A WAY TO PUT IT
BEHIND US, IT COULD OVERWHELM
OUR SOCIETY.
>> Reporter: FEELING OVERWHELMED
BY HER HUSBANDS DIAGNOSIS IS
SOMETHING JUDY STARBUCK IS
FAMILIAR WITH.
>> I HAVE PERIODS OF GREAT
GRIEF, OF LOSS.
YOU KNOW, THEY SAID START
PLANNING TO MAKE A LIFE FOR
YOURSELF, AND I DON'T WANT TO. I
>> Reporter: STARBUCK
VOLUNTEERED FOR THE PREVENTION
TRIALS.
BUT WAS FOUND TO CARRY NO RISK
AND THEREFORE DIDN'T QUALIFY.
IN FACT, RESEARCHERS ACKNOWLEDGE
IT MAY BE TRICKY TO FIND
VOLUNTEERS.
SO THE ARIZONA INSTITUTE HAS
CREATED AN ONLINE ALZHEIMER'S
PREVENTION REGISTRY.
>> ONE OF THE BIGGEST CHALLENGES
IS JUST FINDING ENOUGH PEOPLE TO
PARTICIPATE.
TYPICALLY RESEARCH STUDIES TAKE
PLACE IN PEOPLE WHO ALREADY HAVE
THE DISEASE, AND HERE WE'RE
TRYING TO DO PREVENTION FOCUSED
STUDIES.
>> Reporter: JAMIE TYRONE SAYS
SHE CANT HELP BEING OPTIMISTIC.
>> OH MY GOODNESS WHAT IT MEANS
IS THAT THERE'S HOPE, THERE'S
ACTUAL HOPE, THERE IS A
POSSIBILITY THAT THERE MAY  BE A
PREVENTION IN MY LIFETIME AND MY
FAMILY WON'T HAVE TO GO THROUGH
WHAT WE HAVE IN THE PAST, AND
THAT'S VERY, VERY PROMISING AND
EXCITING.
>> Reporter: THE PREVENTION
TRIALS ARE EXPECTED TO BEGIN IN
2015.
>> Ifill: LEARN MORE ABOUT
ALZHEIMER'S PREVENTION,
INCLUDING HOW TO EAT YOUR WATOY
A HEALTHIER BRAIN.
THAT'S ON OUR HEALTH PAGE.
>> Woodruff: FINALLY TONIGHT, A
FUTURE WHERE YOUR HOME CAN ACT A
LITTLE SMARTER.
YOUR CAR STARTS WITH JUST THE
SOUND OF YOUR VOICE AND YOUR
CLOTHES CAN MEASURE YOUR HEART
RATE AND OTHER PERSONAL DATA.
THOSE ARE JUST SOME OF THE
POSSIBILITIES BEING DISCUSSED AT
THE ANNUAL CONSUMER ELECTRONICS
SHOW IN LAS VEGAS.
IT'S A GATHERING TO HIGHLIGHT
SOME OF THE LATEST DEVELOPMENTS
IN TECHNOLOGY FEATURING PLENTY
OF HIGH-END GADGETS, AND OFTEN A
BIT OF HYPE AS WELL.
THIS YEAR'S THEME IS ABOUT THE
SO-CALLED "INTERNET OF THINGS."
CECILIA KANG OF THE WASHINGTON
POST JOINS US FROM LAS VEGAS TO
FILL US IN ON THAT IDEA AND
MORE.
WELCOME BACK TO THE PROGRAM.
SO I'M ALMOST AFRAID TO DID,
WHAT IS THE INTERNET OF
THINGS.
>> THE INTERNET OF THINGS
REALLY REPRESENTS THE IDEA
THAT THE INTERNET IS MOVING
BEYOND JUST SMART PHONES AND
TABLETS AND HAS REALLY
BECOME PART OF SO MANY MORE
ASPECTS OF OUR LIFE WHERE SO
MANY MORE MACHINES, SO MANY
MORE ACCESSORIES AND GADGETS
ARE CONNECTED TO THE
INTERNET.
EVERYONE FROM A TOASTER TO A
CAR, TO A WRISTWATCH TO YOUR
STOCKS.
SO THE IDEA IS THAT SO MANY
MORE MACHINES AND PARTS OF
YOUR LIFE CAN BE CONNECTED
TO THE INTERNET.
THIS REALLY IS SORT OF THE
NEXT STEP BEYOND A SMART
PHONE RESOLUTION SO WHAT
HAVE YOU SEEN THERE THAT'S
CAUGHT YOUR ATTENTION?
>> WELL, CARS WILL BE A
REALLY BIG THEME HERE.
AND THE SMART SORT OF
INTERNET CONNECTED CAR.
THERE'S A LOT OF ASPECTS TO
THAT.
THE IDEA IS THAT YOU'RE IN
THE CAR FOR A LONG TIME AND
WHAT CARMAKERS AND SILICON
VALLEY HOPES THAT YOU WILL
DO SOME OF THE THINGS THAT
YOU DO IN FRONT OF YOUR
COMPUTER AND OVER YOUR SMART
PHONE IN YOUR CAR AS WELL.
WHICH OF COURSE WEREN'TS
SOME CONCERNS, SOME
QUESTIONS ABOUT SAFETY.
BUT THE IDEA IS THAT TO PUT
4G HIGH-SPEED WIRELESS
INTERNET CONNECTIONS INTO
CARS, AUDI IS GOING TO
ANNOUNCE THAT.
GM IS ANNOUNCING THAT THIS
WEEK.
AND THE, THIS WILL ALLOW SAY,
FOR EXAMPLE, YOU'RE IN A
MINIVAN AND YOU HAVE FOUR
KIDS IN THE CAR AND TWO
PARENTS, SIX PEOPLE TOTAL.
EVERYBODY SHOULD BE ABLE TO
LISTENING TO THE MUSIC THEY
WANT, WATCHING THE VIDEO,
STREAMING THE VIDEOS THEY
WANT, PLAYING WITH THE APPS
AND UPDATING THEIR FACEBOOK
STATUS ALL AT THE SAME TIME
IN THE CAR AND CARMAKERS
HOPE THIS WILL BE THE NEXT
STAGE OF THEIR INDUSTRY
WHICH IS REALLY TRYING TO
FIGURE OUT A WAY TO ATTRACT
MORE AND YOUNGER BUYERS.
>> Woodruff: INSTEAD OF
LOOKING OUT THE WINDOW.
AND WE'RE HOPING THE DRIVER
IS PAYING ATENSION TO WHERE
HE OR SHE IS GOING.
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
AND THERE WILL BE SOME BIG
QUESTIONS ABOUT SAFETY.
AND FEDERAL REGULATORS WILL
CERTAINLY LOOK INTO THIS.
THERE ARE-- THERE ARE SO
MANY CONCERNS ABOUT
DISTRACKS IN THE CAR.
AND THERE WAS A HUGE EFFORT
OVER THE LAST FEW YEARS TO
GET DRIVERS TO STOP TEXTING
WHILE DRIVING.
AND THEN SUDDENLY WE HAVE
THIS IDEA OF SO MANY MORE
INTERNET DISTRACTIONS
POTENTIALLY WHILE YOU'RE
DRIVING.
THE SOLUTION THAT THE
COMPANIES HOPE, THAT THE WEB
COMPANIES AND THE CAR
COMPANIES HOPE TO INTRODUCE
WOULD BE VOICE RECOGNIZED
COMMANDS, THAT THAT WILL
HOPEFULLY AVOID OF THE IDEA
OF PEOPLE GLANCING TOO MUCH
AT A SCREEN AND ACTUALLY
TAPPING ON APPS.
BUT A LOT-OF-THAT REMAINS TO
BE SEEN.
AND IT'S ALSO AN INSURANCE
QUESTION AS WELL.
WITHOUT PICKS UP THE
LIABILITY WHEN THERE'S
ACCIDENTS.
>> Woodruff: WE'VE BEEN
HEARING OVER THE LAST YEAR
OR SO ABOUT DRIVERLESS CARS,
DOES THIS MEAN WE'RE COMING
CLOSER TO THAT?
>> IT CERTAINLY DOES.
IT CERTAINLY DOES IN THE
SENSE THAT THERE'S NO REASON
WHY THE TECHNOLOGY AND THE
WAY THAT IT'S MOVING.
SENSORS ARE SO CHEAP,
CAMERAS ARE SO CHEAP.
THERE IS NO REASON WHY YOUR
CAR CAN'T HAVE LOADS OF THEM
ALL OVER THE CAR AND ALSO
CONNECTED GPS CONNECTIONS
AND THIS INTERNET CONNECTION
TO SENSE WHEN OTHER CARS ARE
TOO CLOSE.
AND ALL THAT CAPABLE, ALL
THESE TECHNOLOGICAL ADVANCES
ARE AVAILABLE TODAY, OR AT
LEAST ARE CONCEPTUALLY
AVAILABLE IN LABS.
AND GOOGLE HAS INTRODUCED
THAT TWO YEARS AGO.
AUDI HAS TALKED ABOUT ITS
OWN PROTOTYPE IT'S WORKING
ON.
EVERY CARMAKER IS SORT OF
INTERESTED IN THIS IDEA
ABOUT THE IDEA OF
POTENTIALLY HAVING PEOPLE IN
THEIR CARS DOING THINGS
OTHER THAN ACTUALLY STEERING
THE CAR.
AND HAVING MORE TIME TO BE
ON THE INTERNET, IF YOU
WILL.
BUT IT WILL TAKE SOME TIME,
JUDY IT WILL PROBABLY TAKE
FIVE TO TEN YEARS IS WHAT
THE CARMAKERS SAY.
THERE ARE THE REGULATORY
CONCERNS.
YOU HAVE TO GET APPROVAL
FROM YOUR LOCAL AND STATE
HIGHWAY PATROL.
AND YOU ALSO HAVE ALL THESE
QUESTIONS AGAIN ABOUT
LIABILITY.
WHO PICKS UP THE INSURANCE
PLANS AND THE BURDEN OF
LIABILITY WHEN THERE'S AN
ACCIDENT.
>> Woodruff: NOW THERE'S
ALSO T THERE ARE SO MANY
OTHER DEVICES AND GADGETS AS
YOU MENTIONED.
SMARTER TVs, TELL US ABOUT
THAT, HOW MUCH SMARTER ARE
THEY THAN THE TVs WE HAVE
NOW.
>> SURE, WELL, I WOULD LOVE
TO STATE THAT THEY ARE SO
MUCH SMARTER, JUDY.
BUT IT SEEMS LIKE THEY'RE
NOT THAT MUCH SMARTER THAN
LAST YEAR AND THE YEAR
BEFORE THAT.
THE PROBLEM WITH TVs, SMART
TVs AND THE IDEA OF SMART
INTERNET TV -- THAT IT ALL
SOUNDS GOOD AND MOST TVs
ACTUALLY THAT ARE SOLD TODAY
IN RETAIL STORES DO HAVE
INTERNET CAPABILITIES.
AND A LOT OF PEOPLE ARE
BUYING APPLE BOXES AND BOCKS
TO ENABLE THEM TO GET ON TO
APPS LIKE NETFLIX AND
PANDORA AND AMAZON PRIME
ON-LINE.
BUT THE THING IS MOST PEOPLE
ACTUALLY ARE ALSO PRETTY
HAPPY WITH THE TV, THE
HARDWARE THAT THEY HAVE
ITSELF.
AND TVs HAVE BECOME SO
CHEAP.
SO THE IDEA OF BUYING SOME
OF THE TVs THAT ARE COMING
OUT AT THE CES SHOW THIS
WEEK WHICH ARE IN THE TENS
OF THOUSANDS OF DOLLARS AN
ARE HUGE, 105 INCH SCREENS
AND ULTRA HD, THAT MEANS
INCREDIBLE RESOLUTION, THE
IDEA OF SPENDING THAT KIND
OF MONEY IS REALLY SO FAR
OUT OF THE BUDGET OF MOST
CONSUMERS.
BUT LIKE MOST PRODUCTS HERE
AT CES, WHAT YOU'RE-- THE
PROVIDERS LIKE THE COMPANIES
LIKE SAMSUNG AND LG ARE
TRYING TO DO IS TO PIQUE
YOUR INTEREST AND SORT OF
GET YOU CURIOUS AND
FASCINATED WITH THE
POSSIBILITY OF WHAT COULD
BE.
SO IT WILL BE PROBABLY A
SMALL MARKET SIZE FOR THOSE
PEOPLE WHO WANT TO BUY
INTERNET CAPABLE TVs.
IT WILL GROW SLOWLY.
BUT IT'S PROBABLY NOT GOING
TO BE THE BIG HIT FOR THE
CONSUMER ELECTRONICS MARKET
GOING FORWARD.
>> JUST IN A FEW SECONDS,
WEARABLE GADGETS.
HOW FAR ARE THEY GETTING
ALONG WITH THOSE?
>> WELL, THERE'S LOTS
OF-- THERE'S A LOT OF
INTERCONNECT-- ACTIVITY
TRACKERS LIKE THE FIT, AND
FUEL BIN AND THOSE ARE
GETTING SMARTER.
AND YOU'RE SEEING THE SAME
KIND OF TECHNOLOGY THAT
THOSE WRISTBANDS HAVE.
MAKE ITS WAY INTO OTHER
PARTS OF YOUR CLOTHING AND
ACCESSORIES, FROM SOCKS TO
SHOES TO HEAD BANDS.
AND THERE'S SO MANY OTHER
THINGS THAT PEOPLE ARE
MEASURING.
THE QUESTION IS I THINK WHAT
CONSUMERS WANT IS A GOOD
PRICE POINT AND THEY
PROBABLY WANT A DEVICE THAT
LOOKS GOOD AND ALSO HAS A
FEW MORE CAPABILITIES THAN
JUST TRACKING YOUR STEPS AND
COUNTING YOUR CALORIES.
THEY'RE HOPING FOR SOMETHING
THAT MIGHT HAVE A LITTLE
MORE INCORPORATION OF SOME
OF THE SMART PHONE
FUNCTIONALITY THAT YOU HAVE
IN YOUR WRISTBAND.
BUT THERE IS A LOT THAT HAS
TO COME TOGETHER FOR A
CONSUME TORE WANT TO SPEND
MORE THAN 200 ON SOMETHING
LIKE THAT.
>> AND THEY ALSO NEED TO BE
ABLE TO UNDERSTAND IT.
>> CECILIA KING FROM "THE
WASHINGTON POST", THANKS
VERY MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: AGAIN, THE MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY.
BITTER COLD LEFT MUCH OF THE
NATION IN THE DEEP FREEZE, WITH
SUB-ZERO WIND CHILLS THAT COULD
POSE DANGERS TO LIFE AND LIMB.
SENATE DEMOCRATS FELL JUST SHORT
OF MOVING FORWARD ON A BILL TO
RESTORE LONG-TERM JOBLESS
BENEFITS.
AND THE PRIME MINISTER OF IRAQ
URGED THE PEOPLE OF FALLUJAH TO
THROW OUT THE AL-QAEDA FIGHTERS
WHO SEIZED CONTROL OF THE CITY
LAST WEEK.
>> Ifill: ON THE NEWSHOUR ONLINE
RIGHT NOW: IMAGINE WORKING 20
HOURS A WEEK FOR FIVE YEARS BUT
NEVER GETTING PAID.
THAT'S THE TYPICAL AMOUNT OF
TIME A LONG-TERM CAREGIVER
DONATES TO A SICK PARENT, SPOUSE
OR OTHER FAMILY MEMBER.
WE HAVE A BY-THE-NUMBERS PROFILE
ON WHAT KIND OF AN IMPACT THIS
CAN HAVE ON THEIR FINANCES ON
OUR RUNDOWN.
ALL THAT AND MORE IS ON OUR WEB
SITE, NEWSHOUR.PBS.ORG.
>> Woodruff: AND THAT'S THE
NEWSHOUR FOR TONIGHT.
WE HAD HOPED TO BRING YOU AN
INTERVIEW WITH THE HEAD OF THE
WORLD PROGRAM ON THE MAJOR
HUMANITARIAN CRISES FACING 2014,
BUT WILL BRING YOU THAT
CONVERSATION TOMORROW.
I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
>> Ifill: AND I'M GWEN IFILL.
WE'LL SEE YOU ON-LINE AND AGAIN
HERE TOMORROW EVENING.
FOR ALL OF US HERE AT THE PBS
NEWSHOUR, THANK YOU AND GOOD
NIGHT.